
CHAPTER I.

THE CRADLE AND THE WEANING.


In the Old Abbey field of Ross Carbery, County of Cork, is the old
Abbey Church of St. Fachtna. Some twenty yards south of the church is
the tomb of Father John Power, around which tomb the people gather
on St. John’s eve, “making rounds” and praying for relief from their
bodily infirmities.

On the tombstone it is recorded that Father Power died on the 10th
of August, 1831. I was at his funeral; I heard my mother say she was
“carrying” me that day. It is recorded on the parish registry that I
was baptized on the 10th of September, 1831; that my god-father was
Jerrie Shanahan, and my god-mother Margaret O’Donovan. When I grew
up to boyhood I knew her as “Aunty Peg.” She was the wife of Patrick
O’Donovan “Rua,” and was the sister of my mother’s father, Cornelius
O’Driscoll. Jerrie Shanahan’s mother was Julia O’Donovan Rossa--my
father’s uncle’s daughter. She is buried in Flatbush, Brooklyn. Her
granddaughter Shanahan is the mother of nine or ten children of the Cox
family, the shoe manufacturers of Rochester, N. Y., who by “clounas”
are connected with the family of ex-Congressman John Quinn of New York,
as John Quinn’s mother was the daughter of Denis Kane of Ross, whose
wife was the sister of John Shanahan. I don’t know if John Quinn knows
that the Coxes of Rochester are cousins of his; I don’t know would he
care to know that his mother’s first cousin, Jerrie Shanahan is my
second cousin, and my god-father. There were forty men of my name and
family in my native town when I was a boy; there is not a man or a boy
of my name in it now. One woman of the name lives as heritor of the old
family tomb in the Old Abbey field.

And that is the story of many another Irishman of the old stock.
Families scattered in death as well as in life; a father buried in
Ireland, a mother buried in Carolina, America; a brother buried in
New York, a brother buried in Pennsylvania, a sister buried in Staten
Island. The curse that scattered the Jews is not more destructive than
this English curse that scatters the Irish race, living and dead.

This place of my birth, Ross Carbery, is famed in Irish history as the
seat of learning in the early centuries. Shrines of St. Fachtna, holy
wells and holy places are numerous all around it. Distinction of some
kind--special good fortune or special misfortune--belongs to the life
of every one born there. It is the birthplace of Maurice J. Power, the
right-hand man of ex-President Grover Cleveland, in the city of New
York. It is the birthplace of Richard Croker, the right-hand man of the
Government of the Tammany Hall Society, in the city of New York.

Of the Fates that hover over my life I have no reason to complain. They
have mixed my fortunes; given me a strong constitution, a light heart,
and a light pocket, making my struggle for existence active enough to
keep the blood in a healthy state of circulation, fortifying me with
strength to stand firm under difficulties, and filling my mind with
strong hope in the future if I do all that I deem right in the present.

The Maurice J. Power in New York that I speak of is the same family of
Powers as the Father John Power at whose tomb the people pray to God
for relief from their infirmities. And the belief is that many have
obtained relief through their prayers there. I know that I have gone
through that Abbey field the day after a St. John’s eve, and I have
seen, propped up by stones, a pair of crutches that were left there by
a man who came into the field on those crutches the previous day. The
holy words say, “Faith will move mountains,” the whole world is the
temple of God, and the pilgrim cripple, full of faith, praying to Him
in that Abbey-field, became able to walk away without his crutches, and
leave them standing there as monuments of the miracle.

Father Jerrie Molony, the priest of the parish, discountenanced the
rush of people to Father Power’s tomb every St. John’s eve: he spoke
against it from the altar on Sundays. All to no use; the people came;
came in thousands. Of course, where people congregated in such
numbers, abuses began to grow; the votaries of sin came into his parish
as well as the votaries of prayer, and very probably the good priest
thought it better to stop the gathering altogether than have it made
the occasion of shame and scandal.

I will here leap some years ahead, to record my recollection of one St.
John’s eve that I was in Ross. It was in the year 1858.

James O’Mahony of Bandon wrote to me that he wished to meet me to have
a talk over Irish national affairs. He suggested that St. John’s eve
in Ross would be a good place, as crowds of people would be there, and
we would escape any prying notice. We met there that day. We had our
talk, and then we walked toward the Abbey field. The blind and the halt
and the lame were there, in every path and passage way, appealing for
alms--appealing mostly in the Irish language. We stood behind one man
who was sitting down, his bare ulcerated legs stretched out from him.
His voice was strong, and his language was beautiful. O’Mahony said he
never heard or read anything in the Irish language so beautiful. Taking
his notebook and pencil to note down the words of the appeal, some
traveling companion of the cripple’s told him that a man was taking
notes, and the cripple turned round and told us to go way. He wouldn’t
speak any more until we went away.

This James O’Mahony was a draper in Bandon; he was the brother of
Thaddeus O’Mahony who was a professor of the Irish language in Trinity
College, Dublin. He went to Australia in the year 1863. I hope he is
alive and happy there. With him went another comrade of mine, William
O’Carroll, who kept a bakery in North Main Street, Cork. They were
among the first men in the South of Ireland that joined the Stephens’
movement. It was James O’Mahony that first gave James Stephens the name
of Seabhac; shouk; hawk. The Shouk shoolach--the walking hawk--was a
name given in olden days to a banned wanderer. Stephens, at the start
of this organization, traveled much of Ireland on foot. A night he
stopped at my house in Skibbereen, I saw the soles of his feet red with
blisters.

This is a long leap I have taken in the chapter of “from the cradle to
the weaning”--a leap from 1831--the year I was born--to 1858, the year
I first met James Stephens. So I will have to leap back now, and talk
on from my childhood.

I must have been very fond of my mother, or my mother must have been
very fond of me, for I must have lived on her breast till I was up to
three years of age. I know she tried often to wean me from her; she
put me to sleep with one of the servant maids, and I remember well the
laugh my father and mother had at me next morning, when I heard her
telling them how often during the night I tried to get at her bosom. I
am more than three years older than my brother Conn, and I suppose it
was the advent of his coming that brought about the arrangement to have
me taken into the country to my grandfather’s place.




CHAPTER II.

AT MY GRANDFATHER’S.


It may be doubted that I remember things that happened to me when I
was at my mother’s breast, or when I was three years old; but I have
no doubt on that matter. Prominent in my forehead is a scar. I got
that scar this way: The girl whose chief duty was to mind me had me on
her back one day. I was slipping off; she bounced herself, to raise
me up on her shoulders, and she threw me clear over her head, on the
street. My forehead came on a stone, and from the cut I got remains the
scar. I could to-day point out the spot where I got that toss--between
Billy O’Hea’s house and Beamish’s gate. I got it before I went to my
grandfather’s. I did not come back to town till I was seven years
old--the time I began my schooling.

Those four years I spent in a farmhouse photographed my memory with
all the pictures of Irish life, and fashioned my tongue to carry the
Irish language without any strain. Some say I have a “brogue.” I have.
I am proud I have, and I will never endeavor to have any other kind
of tongue. I gave a lecture in Detroit one night; coming out the main
doorway, there was a crowd, and behind me coming down the steps I heard
one lady say to another: “What a terrible brogue he has!”

Every allowance is made by English-speaking society for the man of
every other nationality on earth speaking broken English, except for
the Irishman. The Dutchman, the German, the Frenchman, the Russian,
the Italian, can speak broken English, and it won’t be said he speaks
it with a brogue, and is, consequently, illiterate; but the Irishman
who speaks it--a language as foreign to his nationality as it is to
the nationality of any of the others--is met immediately with ridicule
and contempt. But--’tis part of the price or penalty of slavery, and
until Irishmen have manhood to remove that slavery, the name of their
language or their land will not have a respected place among the
nations. We may bravely fight all the battles of all the peoples of
the earth, but while Ireland’s battle for Ireland’s freedom remains
unsuccessfully fought--while England continues to rule Ireland--all the
historical bravery of our race in every land, and in every age will not
save us from the slur of the unfriendly chronicler who writes that we
fight well as “mercenaries,” that we fight bravely the battles of every
land on earth, except the battle of our own land.

The Irish language was the language of the house at my grandfather’s
place. It was the language of the table, the language of the milking
barn, the language of the sowing and the reaping, the language of the
mowing, the “mihal” and the harvest-home. The English language may
be spoken when the landlord or English-speaking people came the way,
but the language natural to every one in the house was Irish, and in
the Irish language I commenced to grow. The household of Renascreena
consisted of my grandfather Cornelius O’Driscoll, my grandmother
Anna-ni-Laoghaire, my aunts, Nance, Johanna, Bridget, Anna; my uncles,
Denis, Conn and Michael. Michael was the youngest of the family. He
keeps the old homestead now (1896). Last year, when I was in Ireland,
he drove into Clonakilty to meet me, looking tall and straight. I
asked him his age. He said seventy-five. All the others--aunts and
uncles--are dead, except Aunt Bridget, who lives at No. 11 Callowhill,
Philadelphia, the wife of Patrick Murray. In the family, had been four
more daughters. Mary, married to John O’Brien; Margaret, married to
Jer. Sheehan, of Shanava; Kate, married to Martin O’Donovan-Ciuin, of
Sawroo, whose son is Martin O’Donovan of San Francisco; and Nellie,
the oldest of the children, married, at the age of fifteen, to Denis
O’Donovan Rossa, of Carrig-a-grianaan, whose son I am.

Yes, married at the age of fifteen my mother was, and born thirteen
years after she was married, was I. There isn’t much of a courtship
story, as far as I could hear. This is how I heard it: My father was
riding his horse home from the fair of Ross one evening. The girls at
the roadside well, there in the valley of the Renascreena road, stopped
his horse and challenged him for a “faireen.” He gave them a guinea; my
mother was the recipient of the gold piece. After that, came a proposal
of marriage. My mother’s people visited at the house of my father’s
people at Carrig-a-grianaan, one mile to the north, to know if the
place was a suitable one. All seemed right, and the marriage came off.
But a story is told about there being some angry words between my two
grandfathers after the marriage. My father’s father kept a bleachery
on his farm, and the day my mother’s father visited the place, the
storehouse of that bleachery was well packed with the “pieces” of
bleached linen, which were looked upon as belonging to the stock of the
house. But, when, after the marriage, the people who sent the pieces
in to be bleached took them away, Grandfather O’Driscoll charged that
everything was not represented fairly to him; he talked angrily, and
said he’d drown himself: “Baithfid me fein, baithfid me fein”--“I’ll
drown myself, I’ll drown myself.”

“Oh,” said the other grandfather, “bidheach ciall agat; ba ghaire do’n
fhairge Donal O’Donobhue ’na thusa, as nior bhathaig se e fein”--“Oh,
have sense; Daniel O’Donoghue was nearer to the sea than you, and he
didn’t drown himself.”

Daniel O’Donoghue was after giving his daughter in marriage to my
uncle, my father’s brother Conn, a short time before that.

There were always in my grandfather’s house at Renascreena a couple
of servant girls and a couple of servant boys; twenty cows had to
be milked, and horses and goats, pigs, poultry and sheep had to
be attended to. And what a bright picture remains in my memory in
connection with the milking time in the barn field back of the house!
The cows, munching their bundles of clover and looking as grave as
Solomons, the milking maids softly singing while stealing the milk from
them into their pails; the sweet smell of the new milk and the new
clover; the larks singing in the heavens overhead, as if keeping time
with the joyous voices on earth.

That was the time when everything in the world around me had a golden
hue. I was the pet of the house. And, how I’d bustle around on a Sunday
morning, giving orders to the boys to get the black horse with the
white face ready for mass! and when the horse was ready, how I’d run
through the bohreen into the main road to look at my granddaddie riding
out, the big buckle in the collar of his great coat shining like gold,
with my Nannie in her side-saddle behind him!

A small kitchen-garden orchard separated the house and outhouses from
the other family homesteads on that hillside slope. They were the
homesteads of my grandfather’s two brothers, Patrick and Denis. As
each of the three homesteads was well populated, the population of the
three of them made a little village, and when the neighboring boys came
around at night to see the girls, there was sport enough for a village.
There were fairies in Ireland then, and I grew up there, thinking that
fairy life was something that was inseparable from Irish life. Fairy
stories would be told that were to me and to those around me as much
realities of Irish life as are the stories that I now read in books
called “Realities of Irish Life.” I grew up a boy, believing that there
were “good people” in this world, and I grew up in manhood, or grow
down, believing there are bad people in it, too. When I was in Ireland
lately the population wasn’t half what it was when I was a boy. I asked
if the fairies had been exterminated, too, for there seemed to be none
of the life around that abounded in my time. Yes, English tyranny had
killed out the “good people,” as well as the living people.

The O’Driscolls did not own the townland of Renascreena themselves,
though the three families of them occupied nearly the whole of it.
The O’Driscolls did own it at one time, and other lands around it,
but the English came over to Ireland in strong numbers; they coveted
the lands of the Irish; they overran the country with fire and sword;
they beat the Irish; they killed many of them; they banished many of
them; and they allowed more of them to remain in the land, on the
condition that they would pay rent to the English, and acknowledge them
as their landlords. That is how the old Irish, on their own lands,
all over Ireland to-day are called tenants, and how the English in
Ireland are called landlords. The landlord of Renascreena in my day was
Thomas Hungerford, of Cahirmore. The landlord to-day is his son Harry
Hungerford, a quiet kind of a man, I understand. The father was a quiet
kind of a man, too. He was, in a small way, a tenant to my father. My
father had the marsh field on the seashore. Tom Hungerford rented from
him a corner of it, out of which to make a quay on which the boatmen
would land sand for his tenants. My father would give me a receipt for
a pound every gale-day to go up with it to Cahirmore. Giving me the
pound one day the big man said:

“If I was so strict with the tenants as to send for the rent to them
the day it fell due, what a cry would be raised against me.” I told
him the rent in this case wasn’t going to beggar him, and as he was
prospering on the estate, it wasn’t much matter to him paying it. He
smiled. He is gone; God be good to him; he was not, that I know of, one
of those evicting landlords that took pleasure in the extermination of
the people.

The Irish people learn through oral tradition what many people learn
from book history. Before I ever read a book, before I ever went to
school, I got into my mind facts of history which appeared incredible
to me. I got into my mind from the fireside stories of my youth that
the English soldiers in Clonakilty, convenient to where I was born,
used to kill the women, and take the young children, born and unborn,
on the points of their bayonets, and dash them against the walls, and
that the soldiers at Bandon Bridge used to tie men in couples with
their hands behind their backs, and fling them into the river.

Those very two atrocious acts are, I find, in Daniel O’Connell’s
“Memoirs of Ireland,” recorded this way:

“1641. At Bandon Bridge they tied eighty-eight Irishmen of the said
town back to back, and threw them off the bridge into the river, where
they were all drowned.--Coll. p. 5.”

“County Cork, 1642. At Cloghnakilty about 238 men, women and children
were murdered, of which number seventeen children were taken by the
legs by soldiers, who knocked out their brains against the walls. This
was done by Phorbis’s men and the garrison of Bandon Bridge.”

O’Connell’s Memoirs give accounts of similar atrocities in every
county of Ireland, and his accounts are taken from Englishmen writers
of Irish history. In the fireside history of my childhood home, I
learned that the English soldiers in Clonakilty took some of the
infants on the points of their bayonets and dashed them against the
walls.

At a flax-mihal, or some gathering of the kind at my grandfather’s, one
night that some of the neighboring girls were in, they and my aunts
were showing presents to each other--earrings, brooches, rings and
little things that way. One of them showed a brooch which looked like
gold, but which probably was brass, and wanted to make much of it.
“Nach e an volumus e!” said one of my aunts. “What a molamus it is.”
That was making little of it. Perhaps the boy who made a present of it
was “pulling a string” with the two girls. The word “volumus” is Latin,
but the Irish language softens it into “molamus,” and uses it as a name
for anything that is made much of, but is really worth very little. You
will see in Lingard’s history of Ireland how the two words came into
the Irish language. After the time of the Reformation, when England
formulated the policy and practice of expelling from Ireland all the
Irish who would not turn Sassenach, and all particularly who had been
plundered of their lands and possessions, she passed laws decreeing
that it was allowable for landlords and magistrates to give “permits”
to people to leave the country, and never come back. But, that the
person leaving, should get a pass or permit to travel to the nearest
seaport town to take shipping. And if a ship was not leaving port the
day of his arrival at the port, he, to give assurance of his desire to
leave the country, should wade into the sea up to his knees every day
till a ship was ready. There were printed forms of such permits; and
the first word in those forms, printed in very large letters, was the
Latin word “Volumus,” which meant: We wish, or we desire, or it is our
pleasure, that the bearer be allowed to leave Ireland forever. A royal
permit to exile yourself, to banish yourself from your native land
forever! Nach e an volumus e! What a molamus it is!

A political lesson was graven on my mind by the Irish magpies that had
their nests in the big skehory tree on the ditch opposite the kitchen
door. I had permission to go through the tree to pick the skehories,
but I was strictly ordered not to go near the magpies’ nest, or to
touch a twig or thorn belonging to it.

If the magpies’ nest was robbed; if their young ones were taken away
from them, they would kill every chicken and gosling that was to be
found around the farmyard. That is the way my grandfather’s magpies
would have their vengeance for having their homes and their families
destroyed; and it made every one in my grandfather’s house “keep the
peace” toward them. I have often thought of my grandfather’s magpies
in connection with the destruction of the houses and families of the
Irish people by the English landlords of Ireland. Those magpies seemed
to have more manly Irish spirit than the Irish people themselves. But
there is no use of talking this way of his childhood’s recollections.
I’ll stop. If childhood has pleasure in plenty, I had it in this house
of my grandfather, from the age of three to the age of seven.

I am publishing a newspaper called The _United Irishman_. In it, I
printed the two preceding chapters.

Ex-Congressman John Quinn, whom I have spoken of in them, sends me the
following letter:

    DEAR ROSSA--I read with delight in the last issue of your truly
    patriotic journal what to me is the most interesting of all
    stories; namely, “Rossa’s Recollections.”

    The traveling along with you, as it were, carries me back to
    the early morning of my life in that dear land beyond the sea,
    and I feel that I hear over again the tales as told by a fond
    mother to her listening, her wondering children, of saintly
    Ross Carbery, and the wild, the grand country from there to
    Bantry Bay.

    Yes, I have heard her tell of the miracles which were performed
    at the tomb of Father John Power, and, I feel that if ever the
    afflicted were healed of their infirmities on any part of this
    earth, they were, at the grave of that saintly priest.

    I was not born in that county, for “under the blue sky of
    Tipperary” my eyes first saw the light of day, but, as you say,
    my mother was born in Ross Carbery; and where is the son who
    does not love the spot where his mother was born? I do, with a
    fondness akin to veneration.

    Oh, what memories you will call up in those recollections of
    yours! How the hearts of the sons and daughters of Ireland will
    throb as they feel themselves carried back in spirit to the
    abbeys, the raths and, alas! the ruins, around which in infancy
    their young feet wandered. For to no people on earth are the
    loved scenes of childhood half so dear as they are to the sons
    and daughters of our Green Isle.

    It is very interesting to me to have brought to my mind once
    more the dear old names from whence I’ve sprung. And, you ask,
    “Would John Quinn care to know that the Kanes, the Shanahans,
    the Coxes, of Rochester; the O’Regans, of South Brooklyn, and
    the children of the exiles, are cousins of his and mine?” Why,
    Rossa; I certainly would be more than delighted to know of
    them, and to meet any of them; the more so, as leaving Ireland
    with my parents immediately after the “Rebellion” of ’48, I
    never had much of an opportunity of meeting any of them, or
    knowing of their whereabouts. No matter where they are, or what
    their lot might be, they would be to me as dear as kindred
    could be.

    When first I learned that the same blood, through the Shanahan
    line, flowed through your veins and mine, I seemed to draw you
    the more closely to me.

    I had long admired you for your devotion to motherland. I have
    in other days wept as I read of your sufferings in British
    dungeons; when, with hands tied behind your back, you were
    compelled, for days at a time, to lap up the miserable food
    given you. I did not know that we were united by ties of
    kinship then, but I felt bound to you by the strongest ties of
    country and of home, for I recognized in you a son of the Gael
    who, no matter what your sufferings might be, had vowed to
    keep the old flag flying; to keep the torch blazing brightly to
    the world, proclaiming that all the power of perfidious England
    could not quench the fires of faith and Fatherland in Ireland.

    Yes, you proclaimed, not only from the hilltops and the valleys
    of our native land, but also from the cells of an English jail,
    that Ireland was not dead, but would yet live to place her heel
    on the neck of England.

    For this, every Irishman should admire, should honor you. Your
    paper and your “Recollections” should be in the hands of every
    true Irishman. The reading of such stories will keep alive the
    faith of our fathers, faith in the sacred cause; yes, and make
    hearts feel young again as they read of those grand old hills
    and valleys of holy Ireland.

    And those noble, those prominent figures, the sons and
    daughters of other days, who played their various parts in the
    great drama of Irish life and patriotism--we shall read of
    them, and though of many, very many, we must feel that in this
    world we shall never meet again, yet we know that in leaving,
    they have but gone a short time before us to enjoy in heaven
    that reward, which hearts so good and pure as theirs were,
    shall surely receive.

    Wishing you success in your “Recollections,” your _United
    Irishman_, and all your undertakings. I am,

        Sincerely yours,

                                                        JOHN QUINN.




CHAPTER III.

MY SCHOOLDAYS.


At the age of seven, I was brought home to my father and mother
in Ross, to be sent to school, and prepared for Confirmation and
Communion. I had received those sacraments of the Church before I was
nine years of age. Confirmation day, the boys were lined along the
chapel aisle in couples, the boy who was my comrade going up to the
altar was Patrick Regan, and it was a singular coincidence that nine
years before that, he and I were baptized the same day in the same
chapel. And we went through school in the same class.

That time, when I was only a very little boy, I must have been a very
big sinner, for I remember the day of my first confession, when I came
out the chapel door, relieved of the weight of my sins, and faced the
iron gate that stood between me and the main road, I felt as though I
could leap over that gate.

If you at any time notice that I occasionally wander away from the main
road of my narrative in these “Recollections,” and run into byroads or
bohreens, or take a leap of fifty years in advance, from the days of my
boyhood to the present days, I have high and holy authority for doing
that. Father Brown, of Staten Island reading the Epistle of the day at
mass yesterday (Feb. 16, 1896) read these words: “When I was a child,
I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, thought as a child; but
when I became a man, I put away childish things.”

I am speaking as a child, so far, and very likely my words will give
less offense than the words I will have to say, when I grow up, and
speak as a man.

In preparing for confirmation, the school broke up about noon on
Saturdays, and the boys were led by the master to the chapel, which was
near by. There, were Father Jerrie Molony, and his nephews, Michael and
Jerrie Molony, who were home from college on vacation, and Tead Red,
to help our master in instructing us in our catechism. Tead Red was
the instructor in the Irish language. He had a class of his own. I saw
Father Molony take hold of a boy in my class one day, and take him over
to the class of Tead Red, telling him it was in the Irish language he
should learn his catechism. How often here in America have I thought
of Father Molony, when I met priests from the most Irish-speaking part
of Ireland, who could not speak the Irish language. No wonder that our
nationality should become diluted and corrupted, no wonder it should
become poisoned with--Trust in the English to free Ireland for us.

But, my schoolmaster! How can I speak of him! He is dead. God be good
to him. I often wonder how he got his schooling. I often wonder how the
people of Ross of my early days got their schooling, for they spoke the
English language more correctly than it is spoken by many of the people
of this day who are called educated; and, with that, they naturally
spoke the Irish language. The priests used to preach in the Irish
language.

I say I wonder how the people of Ross in the generation of my father’s
boyhood got their education, for they were born in a time when
education was banned in Ireland. The schools that are called National
schools were not established till I was born. The hedge-schools and
hedge-schoolmasters were around in the generations that preceded my
time. In the summer time, the children assembled in the shade of the
hedges and trees, and the masters taught them their lessons. In the
winter time the hedge-school was in the shelter of some farmhouse.
As it was in the schooling of the Irish people, so it was in their
religion. That was under a ban too; the priests were boycotted as well
as the people. Yes, for two hundred years after the English religion
was introduced into Ireland, any priest caught saying mass was subject
to a fine; caught a second time, it was fine and imprisonment, and
caught a third time it was banishment or death. Any Irishman caught
attending mass was heavily fined; caught a second time, was doubly
fined, and when the fines increased and were not paid, the lands of the
people were confiscated, and sold out by the English. That is how the
tradition is implanted in the minds of many exiled Irish men and women
to-day--that their people lost their lands in Ireland on account of
sticking to their religion.